labs/lab12-web-scraping.md, before:

Lab 12: Getting Started with Web Scraping
================
Gaston Sanchez

> ### Learning Objectives
> 
>   - Work with the package `"rvest"`
>   - Learn to extract html elements and attributes
>   - Create a simple crawler

-----

## Required Packages

In this lab, you will have to load the following R packages:

``` r
library(XML)
library(xml2)
library(rvest)
library(magrittr)
```

## Motivation

The goal of this lab is to extract the Roster Tables of all the NBA
teams from the website <https://www.basketball-reference.com/>

More specifically, you will extract the rosters of the season 2016-2017.
One example of such table is displayed in the image below with the
Roster of Golden State Warriors (GSW):

![](lab12-images/gsw-2017-roster.png)

The GSW Roster table is in the URL:

<https://www.basketball-reference.com/teams/GSW/2017.html>

You can read this table in R via the `"XML"` function `readHTMLTable()`:

``` r
# Assemble url (so it fits on screen)
basket <- "https://www.basketball-reference.com"
gsw <- "/teams/GSW/2017.html"
gsw_url <- paste0(basket, gsw)

# download HTML file to your working directory
download.file(gsw_url, 'gsw-roster-2017.html')

# Read GSW Roster html table
gsw_roster <- readHTMLTable('gsw-roster-2017.html')
```

If you inspect the contents of `gsw_roster` you should be able to see
some content like this:

    ## $roster
    ##    No.               Player Pos   Ht  Wt         Birth Date    Exp
    ## 1   22          Matt Barnes  SF  6-7 226      March 9, 1980 us  13
    ## 2   21            Ian Clark  SG  6-3 175      March 7, 1991 us   3
    ## 3   30        Stephen Curry  PG  6-3 190     March 14, 1988 us   7
    ## 4   35         Kevin Durant  SF  6-9 240 September 29, 1988 us   9
    ## 5   23       Draymond Green  PF  6-7 230      March 4, 1990 us   4
    ## 6    9       Andre Iguodala  SF  6-6 215   January 28, 1984 us  12
    ## 7   15         Damian Jones   C  7-0 245      June 30, 1995 us   R
    ## 8   34     Shaun Livingston  PG  6-7 192 September 11, 1985 us  11
    ## 9    5         Kevon Looney   C  6-9 220   February 6, 1996 us   1
    ## 10  20 James Michael McAdoo  PF  6-9 230    January 4, 1993 us   2
    ## 11   0        Patrick McCaw  SG  6-7 185   October 25, 1995 us   R
    ## 12   1         JaVale McGee   C  7-0 270   January 19, 1988 us   8
    ## 13  27        Zaza Pachulia   C 6-11 270  February 10, 1984 ge  13
    ## 14  11        Klay Thompson  SG  6-7 215   February 8, 1990 us   5
    ## 15  18     Anderson Varejao   C 6-10 273 September 28, 1982 br  12
    ## 16   2        Briante Weber  PG  6-2 165  December 29, 1992 us   1
    ## 17   3           David West   C  6-9 250    August 29, 1980 us  13
    ##                                  College
    ## 1  University of California, Los Angeles
    ## 2                     Belmont University
    ## 3                       Davidson College
    ## 4          University of Texas at Austin
    ## 5              Michigan State University
    ## 6                  University of Arizona
    ## 7                  Vanderbilt University
    ## 8                                       
    ## 9  University of California, Los Angeles
    ## 10          University of North Carolina
    ## 11       University of Nevada, Las Vegas
    ## 12            University of Nevada, Reno
    ## 13                                      
    ## 14           Washington State University
    ## 15                                      
    ## 16      Virginia Commonwealth University
    ## 17                     Xavier University

### Roster tables

Say you are interested in obtaining the Roster table for the Boston
Celtics (BOS). You could get such table by adapting the code used to get
the GSW roster. The only thing you need to change is the team
abbreviation from `GSW` to `BOS`:

``` r
# Assemble url (so it fits on screen)
basket <- "https://www.basketball-reference.com"
bos <- "/teams/BOS/2017.html"
bos_url <- paste0(basket, bos)

# download HTML file to your working directory
download.file(bos_url, 'bos-roster-2017.html')

# Read BOS Roster html table
bos_roster <- readHTMLTable('bos-roster-2017.html')
```

In order to get the Roster tables of all the NBA teams, you would need
to repeat the same operation with the corresponding team abbreviations.
But how do you get these abbreviations in a programmatic way?

## 2016-17 NBA Season Summary

To get the team abbreviations in a programmatic way, you need to find
URLs of the form `"/teams/GSW/2017.html"`, `"/teams/BOS/2017.html"`,
etc. These pieces of information are available in the
Basketball-Reference website in several web pages.

One of those web pages is the *2016-17 NBA Season Summary* which can be
accessed in the following URL:

<https://www.basketball-reference.com/leagues/NBA_2017.html>

In particular, this page contains information about the *Conference
Standings* displayed in two HTML tables (see screenshot below)

![](lab12-images/conference-standings.png)

We don’t really care about the conference standings. What we care about
is that these two HTML tables contain both: the names of the NBA teams
(rendered on your browser), as well as the href attributes of the form:
`"/teams/GSW/2017.html"`.

If you use Google Chrome as your web browser, you can inspect the HTML
source code by right clicking on your mouse, and selecting the `Inspect`
option. For instance, place the cursor over the *Boston Celtics* link,
and then launch the inspector:

![](lab12-images/inspect1.png)

If you look at the HTML source, you will see the `href` attributes for
each team page. In other words, these are the links to each team’s web
page. And this is exactly the piece of information we are looking for:
the team abbreviations.

![](lab12-images/inspect2.png)

## Extracting HTML elements

So how do we extract these `href` attributes? The first step is to read
the contents of the html file:

<https://www.basketball-reference.com/leagues/NBA_2017.html>

This can be done with the function `read_html()`

``` r
nba_html <- paste0(basket, "/leagues/NBA_2017.html")

xml_doc <- read_html(nba_html)
```

The object `xml_doc` is an object of class `"xml_document"`. If you are
curious about extracting all the content in a character vector, then use
the function `html_text()`, chained with the pipe `%>%` operator:

``` r
xml_text <- xml_doc %>% html_text()
```

The object `xml_text` is a character vector that contains the content of
the html file.

### Extracting elements `h2`

Before attempting extracting the href attributes, let’s begin with
something simpler. For example, let’s see how to extract the value of
all the HTML elements **h2** (i.e. headings of level 2). This can be
done with the function `html_nodes()`, and then `html_text()`

``` r
# content of h2 nodes
xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes("h2") %>%
  html_text() 
```

    ##  [1] "Conference Standings"         " "                           
    ##  [3] "Division Standings"           " "                           
    ##  [5] "Playoff Series"               "Team Per Game Stats"         
    ##  [7] "Opponent Per Game Stats"      "Team Stats"                  
    ##  [9] "Opponent Stats"               "Team Per 100 Poss Stats"     
    ## [11] "Opponent Per 100 Poss Stats"  "Miscellaneous Stats"         
    ## [13] "Team Shooting"                "Opponent Shooting"           
    ## [15] "League Awards"                "Players of the Week & Month" 
    ## [17] "League Leaders"               "All-NBA"                     
    ## [19] "All-Defensive"                "All-Rookie"                  
    ## [21] "All-Star Game Rosters"        "More 2016-17 NBA Pages"      
    ## [23] "Full Site Menu"               "We're Social...for Statheads"
    ## [25] "FAQs, Tip & Tricks"

You can pass the name of an HTML element (i.e. a tag or node) to
`html_nodes()`. In this case, we indicate that we want to locate the
nodes `"h2"`. And then we call `html_text()` to *extract* the actual
content in those nodes.

### Your turn

Use `html_nodes()` and `html_text()` to extract the values of nodes:

  - `"h1"`
  - `"strong"`
  - `"button"`

-----

What if you want to extract HTML tags or nodes that have an attribute?
For instance, if you look at the source code, starting at line 356 you
will see the following HTML elements for *Player Stats*:

``` html
<p class="listhead"><strong>Player Stats</strong></p>
    <ul class="">
        <li><a href="/leagues/NBA_2017_per_game.html">Per Game</a></li>
        <li><a href="/leagues/NBA_2017_totals.html">Totals</a></li>
        <li><a href="/leagues/NBA_2017_per_minute.html">Per 36 Minutes</a></li>
        <li><a href="/leagues/NBA_2017_per_poss.html">Per 100 Possessions</a></li>
        <li><a href="/leagues/NBA_2017_advanced.html">Advanced</a></li>
    </ul>
```

As you can tell, there is a `p` element (i.e. html paragraph) of class
`"listhead"`. You can actually specify this type of node with the name
of the html element, followed by a dot, followed by the name of the
attribute:

``` r
# node with an attribute
xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes("p.listhead") %>%
  html_text()
```

    ## [1] "Player Stats"          "Other"                 "2017 Playoffs Summary"
    ## [4] "Player Stats"          "Other"                 "2017 Playoffs Summary"

## XPath

In order to specify HTML elements that are embeded inside other HTML
elements, you need to use **XPaths**.

XPath expressions have a syntax similar to the way files are located in
a hierarchy of directories/folders in a computer file system. To be more
precise, Xpath expressions allow you to indicate the specific *path*
that must be taken to arrive at a given node.

In general, we can specify paths through the tree structure:

  - based on node names
  - based on node content
  - based on a node’s relationship to other nodes

| Symbol | Description                            |
| ------ | -------------------------------------- |
| `/`    | selects from the root node             |
| `//`   | selects nodes anywhere                 |
| `.`    | selects the current node               |
| `..`   | Selects the parent of the current node |
| `@`    | Selects attributes                     |
| `[]`   | Square brackets to indicate attributes |

Let’s go back to the `p.listhead` nodes. These can be extracted with an
Xpath expression like this:

``` r
xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes(xpath = '//p[@class="listhead"]') %>%
  html_text()
```

    ## [1] "Player Stats"          "Other"                 "2017 Playoffs Summary"
    ## [4] "Player Stats"          "Other"                 "2017 Playoffs Summary"

The XPath `'//p[@class="listhead"]'` means that we want to locate,
anywhere in the tree (`//`), all `<p>` nodes that have an attribute
named `class` that takes the value `"listhead"`.

What if you want to extract the `<a>` values inside the listed items
`<li>`, within the unlisted list `<ul>`?

``` r
xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes(xpath = '//ul[@class=""]/li/a') %>%
  html_text()
```

    ##  [1] "Per Game"             "Totals"               "Per 36 Minutes"      
    ##  [4] "Per 100 Possessions"  "Advanced"             "Debuts"              
    ##  [7] "Final Season"         "Team Ratings"         "Uniform Numbers"     
    ## [10] "Transactions"         "Standings"            "Schedule and Results"
    ## [13] "Leaders"              "Per Game"             "Totals"              
    ## [16] "Per 36 Minutes"       "Per 100 Possessions"  "Advanced"            
    ## [19] "Debuts"               "Final Season"         "Team Ratings"        
    ## [22] "Uniform Numbers"      "Transactions"         "Standings"           
    ## [25] "Schedule and Results" "Leaders"              "Per Game"            
    ## [28] "Totals"               "Per 36 Minutes"       "Per 100 Possessions" 
    ## [31] "Advanced"             "Debuts"               "Final Season"        
    ## [34] "Team Ratings"         "Uniform Numbers"      "Transactions"

or equivalently:

``` r
xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes(xpath = '//ul[@class=""]//a') %>%
  html_text()
```

    ##  [1] "Per Game"             "Totals"               "Per 36 Minutes"      
    ##  [4] "Per 100 Possessions"  "Advanced"             "Debuts"              
    ##  [7] "Final Season"         "Team Ratings"         "Uniform Numbers"     
    ## [10] "Transactions"         "Standings"            "Schedule and Results"
    ## [13] "Leaders"              "Per Game"             "Totals"              
    ## [16] "Per 36 Minutes"       "Per 100 Possessions"  "Advanced"            
    ## [19] "Debuts"               "Final Season"         "Team Ratings"        
    ## [22] "Uniform Numbers"      "Transactions"         "Standings"           
    ## [25] "Schedule and Results" "Leaders"              "Per Game"            
    ## [28] "Totals"               "Per 36 Minutes"       "Per 100 Possessions" 
    ## [31] "Advanced"             "Debuts"               "Final Season"        
    ## [34] "Team Ratings"         "Uniform Numbers"      "Transactions"

## Extracting `href` attributes

Let’s focus again on the first two html tables of the page
<https://www.basketball-reference.com/leagues/NBA_2017.html>.

To extract the first `"table"` you can use `html_nodes()` and
`extract()` as follows:

``` r
# extracting first table 
xml_table1 <- xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes("table") %>%
  extract(1)

class(xml_table1)
```

    ## [1] "xml_nodeset"

The object `xml_table1` is not really an R table, but an object of class
`xml_nodeset`. To extract the html table as a data frame, `"rvest"`
provides the function `html_table()`:

``` r
tbl1 <- html_table(xml_table1)

head(tbl1)
```

    ## [[1]]
    ##          Eastern Conference  W  L  W/L%   GB  PS/G  PA/G   SRS
    ## 1       Boston Celtics* (1) 53 29 0.646    — 108.0 105.4  2.25
    ## 2  Cleveland Cavaliers* (2) 51 31 0.622  2.0 110.3 107.2  2.87
    ## 3      Toronto Raptors* (3) 51 31 0.622  2.0 106.9 102.6  3.65
    ## 4   Washington Wizards* (4) 49 33 0.598  4.0 109.2 107.4  1.36
    ## 5        Atlanta Hawks* (5) 43 39 0.524 10.0 103.2 104.0 -1.23
    ## 6      Milwaukee Bucks* (6) 42 40 0.512 11.0 103.6 103.8 -0.45
    ## 7       Indiana Pacers* (7) 42 40 0.512 11.0 105.1 105.3 -0.64
    ## 8        Chicago Bulls* (8) 41 41 0.500 12.0 102.9 102.4  0.03
    ## 9            Miami Heat (9) 41 41 0.500 12.0 103.2 102.1  0.77
    ## 10     Detroit Pistons (10) 37 45 0.451 16.0 101.3 102.5 -1.29
    ## 11   Charlotte Hornets (11) 36 46 0.439 17.0 104.9 104.7 -0.07
    ## 12     New York Knicks (12) 31 51 0.378 22.0 104.3 108.0 -3.87
    ## 13       Orlando Magic (13) 29 53 0.354 24.0 101.1 107.6 -6.61
    ## 14  Philadelphia 76ers (14) 28 54 0.341 25.0 102.4 108.1 -5.83
    ## 15       Brooklyn Nets (15) 20 62 0.244 33.0 105.8 112.5 -6.74

Likewise, the second html table can be extracted (as an `xml_nodeset`)
in the following way:

``` r
# extracting second table 
xml_table2 <- xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes("table") %>%
  extract(2)
```

Actually, both tables can be extracted simultaneously:

``` r
# two html tables
xml_tables <- xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes("table") %>%
  extract(1:2)
```

Having extracted the tables we are interested in, we can select the
`<a>` nodes, and then extract the content that corresponds to the name
of the teams:

``` r
# extract names of teams
xml_tables %>% 
  html_nodes("a") %>%
  html_text()
```

    ##  [1] "Boston Celtics"         "Cleveland Cavaliers"   
    ##  [3] "Toronto Raptors"        "Washington Wizards"    
    ##  [5] "Atlanta Hawks"          "Milwaukee Bucks"       
    ##  [7] "Indiana Pacers"         "Chicago Bulls"         
    ##  [9] "Miami Heat"             "Detroit Pistons"       
    ## [11] "Charlotte Hornets"      "New York Knicks"       
    ## [13] "Orlando Magic"          "Philadelphia 76ers"    
    ## [15] "Brooklyn Nets"          "Golden State Warriors" 
    ## [17] "San Antonio Spurs"      "Houston Rockets"       
    ## [19] "Los Angeles Clippers"   "Utah Jazz"             
    ## [21] "Oklahoma City Thunder"  "Memphis Grizzlies"     
    ## [23] "Portland Trail Blazers" "Denver Nuggets"        
    ## [25] "New Orleans Pelicans"   "Dallas Mavericks"      
    ## [27] "Sacramento Kings"       "Minnesota Timberwolves"
    ## [29] "Los Angeles Lakers"     "Phoenix Suns"

In order to get the `href` attributes we need to use the `html_attr()`
function:

``` r
# href attributes
xml_tables %>% 
  html_nodes("a") %>%
  html_attr("href")
```

    ##  [1] "/teams/BOS/2017.html" "/teams/CLE/2017.html" "/teams/TOR/2017.html"
    ##  [4] "/teams/WAS/2017.html" "/teams/ATL/2017.html" "/teams/MIL/2017.html"
    ##  [7] "/teams/IND/2017.html" "/teams/CHI/2017.html" "/teams/MIA/2017.html"
    ## [10] "/teams/DET/2017.html" "/teams/CHO/2017.html" "/teams/NYK/2017.html"
    ## [13] "/teams/ORL/2017.html" "/teams/PHI/2017.html" "/teams/BRK/2017.html"
    ## [16] "/teams/GSW/2017.html" "/teams/SAS/2017.html" "/teams/HOU/2017.html"
    ## [19] "/teams/LAC/2017.html" "/teams/UTA/2017.html" "/teams/OKC/2017.html"
    ## [22] "/teams/MEM/2017.html" "/teams/POR/2017.html" "/teams/DEN/2017.html"
    ## [25] "/teams/NOP/2017.html" "/teams/DAL/2017.html" "/teams/SAC/2017.html"
    ## [28] "/teams/MIN/2017.html" "/teams/LAL/2017.html" "/teams/PHO/2017.html"

Bingo\!\!\!

-----

## Your turn

  - Store the href attributes in a character vector `hrefs`.
  - Use string manipulation functions to create a character vector
    `teams` that contains just the team abbreviations: e.g. `"BOS",
    "CLE", "TOR", ...`
  - Create a character vector `files` with elements:
    `"BOS-roster-2017.csv", "CLE-roster-2017.csv",
    "TOR-roster-2017.csv", ...`
  - Use the object `basket` and the first element of `hrefs` (i.e.
    `hrefs[1]`) to assemble a `team_url` like the one used for
    `gsw_url`:

<!-- end list -->

    # modify with `hrefs[1]`
    basket <- "https://www.basketball-reference.com"
    gsw <- "/teams/GSW/2017.html"
    gsw_url <- paste0(basket, gsw)

  - Read the html document of `team_url`.
  - Use `html_table()` to extract the content of the html table as a
    data frame called `roster`.
  - Store the data frame in a csv file: `"BOS-roster-2017.csv"`.

Having making sure that your code above works, now generalize it to more
teams. In theory, your code should be able to collect all 30 roster
tables. However, since everyone will be making constant requests to the
*basketball-reference* website at the same time, write code that scrapes
a couple of roster tables (e.g. 5 or 7 teams).

  - Create a `for ()` loop to extract a handful of the roster tables as
    data frames.
  - Store each table in its own csv file: e.g. `"GSW-roster-2017.csv"`

### Challenge

Using all the saved csv files, how would you build a global table
containing the extracted rosters, in a way that this table would also
have a column for the team?

Try getting such a global table and save it in a file
`nba-rosters-2017.csv`

Commit message:

labs: add submission instructions to lab12

labs/lab12-web-scraping.md, after:

Lab 12: Getting Started with Web Scraping
================
Gaston Sanchez

> ### Learning Objectives
> 
>   - Work with the package `"rvest"`
>   - Learn to extract html elements and attributes
>   - Create a simple crawler

### General Instructions

  - Write your descriptions and code, for the first part of this lab, in
    an `Rmd` (R markdown) file.
  - Name this file as `lab12-first-last.Rmd`, where `first` and `last`
    are your first and last names (e.g. `lab12-gaston-sanchez.Rmd`).
  - Knit your `Rmd` file as an html document (default option).
  - Submit your `Rmd` and `html` files to bCourses, in the corresponding
    lab assignment.
  - Due date displayed in the syllabus (see github repo).

-----

## Required Packages

In this lab, you will have to load the following R packages:

``` r
library(XML)
library(xml2)
library(rvest)
library(magrittr)
```

## Motivation

The goal of this lab is to extract the Roster Tables of all the NBA
teams from the website <https://www.basketball-reference.com/>

More specifically, you will extract the rosters of the season 2016-2017.
One example of such table is displayed in the image below with the
Roster of Golden State Warriors (GSW):

![](lab12-images/gsw-2017-roster.png)

The GSW Roster table is in the URL:

<https://www.basketball-reference.com/teams/GSW/2017.html>

You can read this table in R via the `"XML"` function `readHTMLTable()`:

``` r
# Assemble url (so it fits on screen)
basket <- "https://www.basketball-reference.com"
gsw <- "/teams/GSW/2017.html"
gsw_url <- paste0(basket, gsw)

# download HTML file to your working directory
download.file(gsw_url, 'gsw-roster-2017.html')

# Read GSW Roster html table
gsw_roster <- readHTMLTable('gsw-roster-2017.html')
```

If you inspect the contents of `gsw_roster` you should be able to see
some content like this:

    ## $roster
    ##    No.               Player Pos   Ht  Wt         Birth Date    Exp
    ## 1   22          Matt Barnes  SF  6-7 226      March 9, 1980 us  13
    ## 2   21            Ian Clark  SG  6-3 175      March 7, 1991 us   3
    ## 3   30        Stephen Curry  PG  6-3 190     March 14, 1988 us   7
    ## 4   35         Kevin Durant  SF  6-9 240 September 29, 1988 us   9
    ## 5   23       Draymond Green  PF  6-7 230      March 4, 1990 us   4
    ## 6    9       Andre Iguodala  SF  6-6 215   January 28, 1984 us  12
    ## 7   15         Damian Jones   C  7-0 245      June 30, 1995 us   R
    ## 8   34     Shaun Livingston  PG  6-7 192 September 11, 1985 us  11
    ## 9    5         Kevon Looney   C  6-9 220   February 6, 1996 us   1
    ## 10  20 James Michael McAdoo  PF  6-9 230    January 4, 1993 us   2
    ## 11   0        Patrick McCaw  SG  6-7 185   October 25, 1995 us   R
    ## 12   1         JaVale McGee   C  7-0 270   January 19, 1988 us   8
    ## 13  27        Zaza Pachulia   C 6-11 270  February 10, 1984 ge  13
    ## 14  11        Klay Thompson  SG  6-7 215   February 8, 1990 us   5
    ## 15  18     Anderson Varejao   C 6-10 273 September 28, 1982 br  12
    ## 16   2        Briante Weber  PG  6-2 165  December 29, 1992 us   1
    ## 17   3           David West   C  6-9 250    August 29, 1980 us  13
    ##                                  College
    ## 1  University of California, Los Angeles
    ## 2                     Belmont University
    ## 3                       Davidson College
    ## 4          University of Texas at Austin
    ## 5              Michigan State University
    ## 6                  University of Arizona
    ## 7                  Vanderbilt University
    ## 8                                       
    ## 9  University of California, Los Angeles
    ## 10          University of North Carolina
    ## 11       University of Nevada, Las Vegas
    ## 12            University of Nevada, Reno
    ## 13                                      
    ## 14           Washington State University
    ## 15                                      
    ## 16      Virginia Commonwealth University
    ## 17                     Xavier University

### Roster tables

Say you are interested in obtaining the Roster table for the Boston
Celtics (BOS). You could get such table by adapting the code used to get
the GSW roster. The only thing you need to change is the team
abbreviation from `GSW` to `BOS`:

``` r
# Assemble url (so it fits on screen)
basket <- "https://www.basketball-reference.com"
bos <- "/teams/BOS/2017.html"
bos_url <- paste0(basket, bos)

# download HTML file to your working directory
download.file(bos_url, 'bos-roster-2017.html')

# Read BOS Roster html table
bos_roster <- readHTMLTable('bos-roster-2017.html')
```

In order to get the Roster tables of all the NBA teams, you would need
to repeat the same operation with the corresponding team abbreviations.
But how do you get these abbreviations in a programmatic way?

## 2016-17 NBA Season Summary

To get the team abbreviations in a programmatic way, you need to find
URLs of the form `"/teams/GSW/2017.html"`, `"/teams/BOS/2017.html"`,
etc. These pieces of information are available in the
Basketball-Reference website in several web pages.

One of those web pages is the *2016-17 NBA Season Summary* which can be
accessed in the following URL:

<https://www.basketball-reference.com/leagues/NBA_2017.html>

In particular, this page contains information about the *Conference
Standings* displayed in two HTML tables (see screenshot below)

![](lab12-images/conference-standings.png)

We don’t really care about the conference standings. What we care about
is that these two HTML tables contain both: the names of the NBA teams
(rendered on your browser), as well as the href attributes of the form:
`"/teams/GSW/2017.html"`.

If you use Google Chrome as your web browser, you can inspect the HTML
source code by right clicking on your mouse, and selecting the `Inspect`
option. For instance, place the cursor over the *Boston Celtics* link,
and then launch the inspector:

![](lab12-images/inspect1.png)

If you look at the HTML source, you will see the `href` attributes for
each team page. In other words, these are the links to each team’s web
page. And this is exactly the piece of information we are looking for:
the team abbreviations.

![](lab12-images/inspect2.png)

## Extracting HTML elements

So how do we extract these `href` attributes? The first step is to read
the contents of the html file:

<https://www.basketball-reference.com/leagues/NBA_2017.html>

This can be done with the function `read_html()`

``` r
nba_html <- paste0(basket, "/leagues/NBA_2017.html")

xml_doc <- read_html(nba_html)
```

The object `xml_doc` is an object of class `"xml_document"`. If you are
curious about extracting all the content in a character vector, then use
the function `html_text()`, chained with the pipe `%>%` operator:

``` r
xml_text <- xml_doc %>% html_text()
```

The object `xml_text` is a character vector that contains the content of
the html file.

### Extracting elements `h2`

Before attempting extracting the href attributes, let’s begin with
something simpler. For example, let’s see how to extract the value of
all the HTML elements **h2** (i.e. headings of level 2). This can be
done with the function `html_nodes()`, and then `html_text()`

``` r
# content of h2 nodes
xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes("h2") %>%
  html_text() 
```

    ##  [1] "Conference Standings"         " "                           
    ##  [3] "Division Standings"           " "                           
    ##  [5] "Playoff Series"               "Team Per Game Stats"         
    ##  [7] "Opponent Per Game Stats"      "Team Stats"                  
    ##  [9] "Opponent Stats"               "Team Per 100 Poss Stats"     
    ## [11] "Opponent Per 100 Poss Stats"  "Miscellaneous Stats"         
    ## [13] "Team Shooting"                "Opponent Shooting"           
    ## [15] "League Awards"                "Players of the Week & Month" 
    ## [17] "League Leaders"               "All-NBA"                     
    ## [19] "All-Defensive"                "All-Rookie"                  
    ## [21] "All-Star Game Rosters"        "More 2016-17 NBA Pages"      
    ## [23] "Full Site Menu"               "We're Social...for Statheads"
    ## [25] "FAQs, Tip & Tricks"

You can pass the name of an HTML element (i.e. a tag or node) to
`html_nodes()`. In this case, we indicate that we want to locate the
nodes `"h2"`. And then we call `html_text()` to *extract* the actual
content in those nodes.

### Your turn

Use `html_nodes()` and `html_text()` to extract the values of nodes:

  - `"h1"`
  - `"strong"`
  - `"button"`

-----

What if you want to extract HTML tags or nodes that have an attribute?
For instance, if you look at the source code, starting at line 356 you
will see the following HTML elements for *Player Stats*:

``` html
<p class="listhead"><strong>Player Stats</strong></p>
    <ul class="">
        <li><a href="/leagues/NBA_2017_per_game.html">Per Game</a></li>
        <li><a href="/leagues/NBA_2017_totals.html">Totals</a></li>
        <li><a href="/leagues/NBA_2017_per_minute.html">Per 36 Minutes</a></li>
        <li><a href="/leagues/NBA_2017_per_poss.html">Per 100 Possessions</a></li>
        <li><a href="/leagues/NBA_2017_advanced.html">Advanced</a></li>
    </ul>
```

As you can tell, there is a `p` element (i.e. html paragraph) of class
`"listhead"`. You can actually specify this type of node with the name
of the html element, followed by a dot, followed by the name of the
attribute:

``` r
# node with an attribute
xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes("p.listhead") %>%
  html_text()
```

    ## [1] "Player Stats"          "Other"                 "2017 Playoffs Summary"
    ## [4] "Player Stats"          "Other"                 "2017 Playoffs Summary"

## XPath

In order to specify HTML elements that are embeded inside other HTML
elements, you need to use **XPaths**.

XPath expressions have a syntax similar to the way files are located in
a hierarchy of directories/folders in a computer file system. To be more
precise, Xpath expressions allow you to indicate the specific *path*
that must be taken to arrive at a given node.

In general, we can specify paths through the tree structure:

  - based on node names
  - based on node content
  - based on a node’s relationship to other nodes

| Symbol | Description                            |
| ------ | -------------------------------------- |
| `/`    | selects from the root node             |
| `//`   | selects nodes anywhere                 |
| `.`    | selects the current node               |
| `..`   | Selects the parent of the current node |
| `@`    | Selects attributes                     |
| `[]`   | Square brackets to indicate attributes |

Let’s go back to the `p.listhead` nodes. These can be extracted with an
Xpath expression like this:

``` r
xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes(xpath = '//p[@class="listhead"]') %>%
  html_text()
```

    ## [1] "Player Stats"          "Other"                 "2017 Playoffs Summary"
    ## [4] "Player Stats"          "Other"                 "2017 Playoffs Summary"

The XPath `'//p[@class="listhead"]'` means that we want to locate,
anywhere in the tree (`//`), all `<p>` nodes that have an attribute
named `class` that takes the value `"listhead"`.

What if you want to extract the `<a>` values inside the listed items
`<li>`, within the unlisted list `<ul>`?

``` r
xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes(xpath = '//ul[@class=""]/li/a') %>%
  html_text()
```

    ##  [1] "Per Game"             "Totals"               "Per 36 Minutes"      
    ##  [4] "Per 100 Possessions"  "Advanced"             "Debuts"              
    ##  [7] "Final Season"         "Team Ratings"         "Uniform Numbers"     
    ## [10] "Transactions"         "Standings"            "Schedule and Results"
    ## [13] "Leaders"              "Per Game"             "Totals"              
    ## [16] "Per 36 Minutes"       "Per 100 Possessions"  "Advanced"            
    ## [19] "Debuts"               "Final Season"         "Team Ratings"        
    ## [22] "Uniform Numbers"      "Transactions"         "Standings"           
    ## [25] "Schedule and Results" "Leaders"              "Per Game"            
    ## [28] "Totals"               "Per 36 Minutes"       "Per 100 Possessions" 
    ## [31] "Advanced"             "Debuts"               "Final Season"        
    ## [34] "Team Ratings"         "Uniform Numbers"      "Transactions"

or equivalently:

``` r
xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes(xpath = '//ul[@class=""]//a') %>%
  html_text()
```

    ##  [1] "Per Game"             "Totals"               "Per 36 Minutes"      
    ##  [4] "Per 100 Possessions"  "Advanced"             "Debuts"              
    ##  [7] "Final Season"         "Team Ratings"         "Uniform Numbers"     
    ## [10] "Transactions"         "Standings"            "Schedule and Results"
    ## [13] "Leaders"              "Per Game"             "Totals"              
    ## [16] "Per 36 Minutes"       "Per 100 Possessions"  "Advanced"            
    ## [19] "Debuts"               "Final Season"         "Team Ratings"        
    ## [22] "Uniform Numbers"      "Transactions"         "Standings"           
    ## [25] "Schedule and Results" "Leaders"              "Per Game"            
    ## [28] "Totals"               "Per 36 Minutes"       "Per 100 Possessions" 
    ## [31] "Advanced"             "Debuts"               "Final Season"        
    ## [34] "Team Ratings"         "Uniform Numbers"      "Transactions"

## Extracting `href` attributes

Let’s focus again on the first two html tables of the page
<https://www.basketball-reference.com/leagues/NBA_2017.html>.

To extract the first `"table"` you can use `html_nodes()` and
`extract()` as follows:

``` r
# extracting first table 
xml_table1 <- xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes("table") %>%
  extract(1)

class(xml_table1)
```

    ## [1] "xml_nodeset"

The object `xml_table1` is not really an R table, but an object of class
`xml_nodeset`. To extract the html table as a data frame, `"rvest"`
provides the function `html_table()`:

``` r
tbl1 <- html_table(xml_table1)

head(tbl1)
```

    ## [[1]]
    ##          Eastern Conference  W  L  W/L%   GB  PS/G  PA/G   SRS
    ## 1       Boston Celtics* (1) 53 29 0.646    — 108.0 105.4  2.25
    ## 2  Cleveland Cavaliers* (2) 51 31 0.622  2.0 110.3 107.2  2.87
    ## 3      Toronto Raptors* (3) 51 31 0.622  2.0 106.9 102.6  3.65
    ## 4   Washington Wizards* (4) 49 33 0.598  4.0 109.2 107.4  1.36
    ## 5        Atlanta Hawks* (5) 43 39 0.524 10.0 103.2 104.0 -1.23
    ## 6      Milwaukee Bucks* (6) 42 40 0.512 11.0 103.6 103.8 -0.45
    ## 7       Indiana Pacers* (7) 42 40 0.512 11.0 105.1 105.3 -0.64
    ## 8        Chicago Bulls* (8) 41 41 0.500 12.0 102.9 102.4  0.03
    ## 9            Miami Heat (9) 41 41 0.500 12.0 103.2 102.1  0.77
    ## 10     Detroit Pistons (10) 37 45 0.451 16.0 101.3 102.5 -1.29
    ## 11   Charlotte Hornets (11) 36 46 0.439 17.0 104.9 104.7 -0.07
    ## 12     New York Knicks (12) 31 51 0.378 22.0 104.3 108.0 -3.87
    ## 13       Orlando Magic (13) 29 53 0.354 24.0 101.1 107.6 -6.61
    ## 14  Philadelphia 76ers (14) 28 54 0.341 25.0 102.4 108.1 -5.83
    ## 15       Brooklyn Nets (15) 20 62 0.244 33.0 105.8 112.5 -6.74

Likewise, the second html table can be extracted (as an `xml_nodeset`)
in the following way:

``` r
# extracting second table 
xml_table2 <- xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes("table") %>%
  extract(2)
```

Actually, both tables can be extracted simultaneously:

``` r
# two html tables
xml_tables <- xml_doc %>%
  html_nodes("table") %>%
  extract(1:2)
```

Having extracted the tables we are interested in, we can select the
`<a>` nodes, and then extract the content that corresponds to the name
of the teams:

``` r
# extract names of teams
xml_tables %>% 
  html_nodes("a") %>%
  html_text()
```

    ##  [1] "Boston Celtics"         "Cleveland Cavaliers"   
    ##  [3] "Toronto Raptors"        "Washington Wizards"    
    ##  [5] "Atlanta Hawks"          "Milwaukee Bucks"       
    ##  [7] "Indiana Pacers"         "Chicago Bulls"         
    ##  [9] "Miami Heat"             "Detroit Pistons"       
    ## [11] "Charlotte Hornets"      "New York Knicks"       
    ## [13] "Orlando Magic"          "Philadelphia 76ers"    
    ## [15] "Brooklyn Nets"          "Golden State Warriors" 
    ## [17] "San Antonio Spurs"      "Houston Rockets"       
    ## [19] "Los Angeles Clippers"   "Utah Jazz"             
    ## [21] "Oklahoma City Thunder"  "Memphis Grizzlies"     
    ## [23] "Portland Trail Blazers" "Denver Nuggets"        
    ## [25] "New Orleans Pelicans"   "Dallas Mavericks"      
    ## [27] "Sacramento Kings"       "Minnesota Timberwolves"
    ## [29] "Los Angeles Lakers"     "Phoenix Suns"

In order to get the `href` attributes we need to use the `html_attr()`
function:

``` r
# href attributes
xml_tables %>% 
  html_nodes("a") %>%
  html_attr("href")
```

    ##  [1] "/teams/BOS/2017.html" "/teams/CLE/2017.html" "/teams/TOR/2017.html"
    ##  [4] "/teams/WAS/2017.html" "/teams/ATL/2017.html" "/teams/MIL/2017.html"
    ##  [7] "/teams/IND/2017.html" "/teams/CHI/2017.html" "/teams/MIA/2017.html"
    ## [10] "/teams/DET/2017.html" "/teams/CHO/2017.html" "/teams/NYK/2017.html"
    ## [13] "/teams/ORL/2017.html" "/teams/PHI/2017.html" "/teams/BRK/2017.html"
    ## [16] "/teams/GSW/2017.html" "/teams/SAS/2017.html" "/teams/HOU/2017.html"
    ## [19] "/teams/LAC/2017.html" "/teams/UTA/2017.html" "/teams/OKC/2017.html"
    ## [22] "/teams/MEM/2017.html" "/teams/POR/2017.html" "/teams/DEN/2017.html"
    ## [25] "/teams/NOP/2017.html" "/teams/DAL/2017.html" "/teams/SAC/2017.html"
    ## [28] "/teams/MIN/2017.html" "/teams/LAL/2017.html" "/teams/PHO/2017.html"

Bingo\!\!\!

-----

## Your turn

  - Store the href attributes in a character vector `hrefs`.
  - Use string manipulation functions to create a character vector
    `teams` that contains just the team abbreviations: e.g. `"BOS",
    "CLE", "TOR", ...`
  - Create a character vector `files` with elements:
    `"BOS-roster-2017.csv", "CLE-roster-2017.csv",
    "TOR-roster-2017.csv", ...`
  - Use the object `basket` and the first element of `hrefs` (i.e.
    `hrefs[1]`) to assemble a `team_url` like the one used for
    `gsw_url`:

<!-- end list -->

    # modify with `hrefs[1]`
    basket <- "https://www.basketball-reference.com"
    gsw <- "/teams/GSW/2017.html"
    gsw_url <- paste0(basket, gsw)

  - Read the html document of `team_url`.
  - Use `html_table()` to extract the content of the html table as a
    data frame called `roster`.
  - Store the data frame in a csv file: `"BOS-roster-2017.csv"`.

Having making sure that your code above works, now generalize it to more
teams. In theory, your code should be able to collect all 30 roster
tables. However, since everyone will be making constant requests to the
*basketball-reference* website at the same time, write code that scrapes
a couple of roster tables (e.g. 5 or 7 teams).

  - Create a `for ()` loop to extract a handful of the roster tables as
    data frames.
  - Store each table in its own csv file: e.g. `"GSW-roster-2017.csv"`

### Challenge

Using all the saved csv files, how would you build a global table
containing the extracted rosters, in a way that this table would also
have a column for the team?

Try getting such a global table and save it in a file
`nba-rosters-2017.csv`
